Sleepers "There are several types of goblins according to Kaspar Dyelos.The smallest are called Myanmoi, or mouse-men, the middling are named Fetches, and then there are several which are as large as children and can live to be very old." -from "A Treatise on the Fairy Peoples of Eion and Xand" AT FIRST it was all Barrick could do to stay on his feet. The slope was uneven, vines and brambles grew in tangles between the trees, and every few steps a vast knob of pale, yellowish stone thrust out of the greenery like a broken bone to block his way. The silkins, however, did seem to be falling back: he could still see them in the trees behind him, white figures leaping from branch to branch like ghostly apes, but without the aggressive haste they had shown before.
The bird was right, he thought. The silkins are just as afraid of this place as everyone else.
Which probably did not mean anything good for Barrick himself, of course, except that he might get a chance to rest and think. The creatures would be waiting when he came back down and he still had no weapon to face them with but his broken spear. And where was Skurn? Had the bird finally deserted him once and for all?
The steep slope made his lungs and legs ache. When he no longer saw any of his pursuers he paused to rest, but could not stop thinking of their featureless, thread-wrapped faces and gummy black eyes and how they might be crawling silently through the trees to surround him, so after a short while he forced himself onto his feet and began to climb once more, searching for open ground and a better vantage point.
The slope became steeper. Barrick frequently had to use his hands on branches and outcroppings to pull himself up, which made his crippled arm ache even worse than his lungs, throbbing and burning until his eyes filled with tears. The hopelessness of his situation began to weigh him down. He was in a strange land-a deadly, unknown land full of demons and monstrous creatures-and all but alone. How long could he go on this way, without help, without food or weapons or even a map? Any bad fall would leave him helpless and waiting for death…
Barrick suddenly tripped and tumbled heavily onto his hands and knees-it hurt so badly he cried out. He sank forward onto his elbows, staring at the ground only a few inches away, eyes blurry with sweat and tears. There was something strange about that ground, he realized after a moment-something very strange indeed.
It had writing on it.
He straightened up. He was kneeling on a slab of the pale ochre stone. Symbols he did not recognize had been scratched deep into its surface, and although they had been polished almost to invisibility by wind and rain, it was unquestionably the work of some intelligent hand. Barrick hastily climbed to his feet. He looked up and saw that the crest of the hill was not as far away as it had seemed-perhaps less than an hour's climb even at his limping pace. He took a deep breath and looked around for any sign of the silkins-he saw nothing and heard only the wind sighing through the trees-then began to make his way upward once more. Even if he was going to die here on Cursed Hill, he thought, it would be nice to see a high place first. Maybe the gray skies would seem brighter up there-that would be something good. Barrick Eddon was sick at heart with mist and shadowy places.
As he struggled up the last heights he saw that some previous inhabitants or visitors had done more than simply carve symbols into the yellow stones: in some spots curves of outcropping rock had been used as makeshift roofs, with shelters built beneath them, although little was left of these but an occasional wall of loose stones gathered together and carefully stacked. As he neared the summit the yellowish outcroppings became more common, great knobs and curving stretches of stone to which the greenery clung like a rough blanket. The primitive structures also grew more complex, weathered lumps of the hill's smooth bedrock extended and connected by stacked boulders and even some crude wooden walls and roofs, but all empty and long since deserted, with no sign left of whoever had inhabited them except for the occasional antlike track of carved symbols across their surfaces.
Here in the evergreen highlands the mists were at least as thick and slippery as at the base of the hill, but the place was even quieter, missing even the very occasional bird noises he had heard below. Even though Barrick had not seen any sign of the silkins for what seemed an hour or more, the quiet oppressiveness of the place was beginning to unnerve him, making his plan to stay here seem utter nonsense. It was all he could do to continue climbing toward the highest ridge, only a short distance away now and nothing but pearl-gray twilit sky visible behind it.
He pulled himself up onto a prominence and saw that one last mound of stone, greenery, and muddy earth remained between him and the summit, and that the strangest dwelling of all had been built there, a dome of curving stone protruding at an odd angle from the trees and tangled shrubbery, with a huge oblong window gaping in the undergrowth near it. A stone path wound up the last stretch of hillside from the snag of creepers in which he stood, leading to a dark overhang just below the oblong window. The palisade of broken stones he had seen from so far away, the ones like broken teeth, jutted from the forested peak just above the odd dwelling.
Mist and fog hung over this strange place like one of the asphodel crowns children wore for the feast of Onir Zakkas. The vapors were not only thicker here than at the bottom of the hill, but also seemed a different color and consistency. Barrick stared for long moments before he realized that some of it was not mist at all, but smoke rising from between the trees along the very top of the crest.
Smoke. Chimneys. Someone lived in this godforsaken place. On top of Cursed Hill.
He turned, heart beating even faster now than in the midst of the arduous climb, but before he could take a step back down the slope a voice came to him from nowhere and everywhere, echoing softly in the skirl of wind along the hillside, but also inside his head.
"Come," it whispered. "We are waiting for you."
Barrick found he could no longer command his own limbs, at least not to take him farther away from the strange house on the summit, a house that awaited him like an abandoned well into which he might fall and drown.
"Come. Come to us. We are waiting for you."
To his astonishment, he abruptly found himself a passive observer in his own flesh. His body turned and began to climb the promontory until his feet were on the stony path, then it walked on toward the stone dwelling like a cloud pushed by wind, Barrick watching helplessly from inside it. The oblong window and the shadowed overhang grew closer and closer. The last stretch of the hill's high peak loomed above him for a moment, then he passed beneath through the opening into darkness.
A moment later the dark gave way to a spreading, reddish light. Barrick recovered a little command of his own limbs, but only enough to pause for a moment, his heart hammering at triple speed, before the unwavering pull of what lay before him exerted itself again.
"Come. We have waited a long time, child of men. We were beginning to fear we had misunderstood what was given to us."
The stony room rounded upward like a dome on the inside, a strange, pale, cavernous place five or six times Barrick's height, its uppermost point rife with incomprehensible carvings, scrawls, and swirls just visible through the black residue of smoke. The red light and the smoke both came from a small fire set in a ring of stones on a floor of rubble and dirt. Three hunched figures of about Barrick's own size sat behind it on a low platform of stone.
"You are tired," the voice told him. Who was speaking? The shapes before him did not move. "You may sit if that will ease you. We regret we have little to offer you in the way of food or drink, but our ways are not like yours."
"We give him much," snapped another voice. It was almost identical to the first and equally bodiless, but with an edge to it that told him somehow it was a different speaker. "We give him more than we have given any other."
"Because that is the purpose to which we were called. And what we give to him will be no kindness," said the first voice.
Barrick wanted to run, wanted it badly, but he could still barely move. The raven had been right-he had been a fool to come here. He finally made his voice work. "Who… who are you?"
"Us?" the sharper, second voice said. "There is no true name we could give ourselves that you would know or understand."
"Tell him," spoke up a third, similar to the others but perhaps older and more frail. "Tell him the truth. We are the Sleepers. We are the rejected, the unwanted. We are those who see and cannot help but see." The voice was like a ghost murmuring at the top of an empty tower. Barrick was shivering hard, but he could not make his limbs work to run away.
"You are frightening the Sunlander child," the first voice said in mild reproach. "He does not understand you."
"I am no child." Barrick did not want these creatures in his head. It was too much like the last moments before the great door of Kernios-the moments in which he had felt Gyir die. "Just let me go."
"He does not understand us," said the weakest of the voices. "All is lost, as I feared. The world has turned too far…"
"Be silent!" said the harsher second voice. "He is an outsider. He is a Sunlander. Blood means nothing beneath the Daystar."
"But all blood is the same color under Silvergleam's light," said the first. "Child, rest easy. We will not harm you."
"You speak only for yourself," said the second voice. "I could burn away his thoughts like dry grass. If he threatens me, I will."
"Now it is you who should be silent, Hikat," said the first voice. "Your anger is unneeded here."
"We are scorned by all the world," said the one called Hikat. "We nestle in the very bones of those who would destroy us as they hover at the edge of wakefulness. My anger is unneeded, Hau? It is you who are useless, with your impossible schemes and dreams."
"When is the child coming?" asked the trembling third voice. "You spoke of a child?"
"The child has already come, Hoorooen," the first voice answered. "He is here."
"Ah." The weak voice let out something that felt like a sigh inside Barrick's head. "I wondered…"
"Why are you doing this to me?" Barrick tried again to turn and leave the domelike cavern but could not make his limbs do his bidding. "Are you all mad? I don't understand anything you're saying, not any of it. Who are you?"
"We are brothers," began Hau, "children of the…"
"Brothers?" This was the one called Hikat. "Fool! You are my mother-and he is your father."
"I had a son, once…" quavered Hoorooen.
The centermost of the three figures slowly stood. Its robes flapped open, and for a moment Barrick saw a glimpse of withered, sexless gray flesh. His heart stuttered and seemed to go cold in his chest; if he could have scrambled away from the firepit he would have. He had seen skin of that stony color on Jikuyin's cruel servant, Ueni'ssoh, but this creature seemed as dry and drawn as a mummified corpse.
"But we are not that one, Barrick Eddon," said Hau as if the boy had spoken these thoughts aloud. "We are not your enemies."
"How do you know my name?" It seemed more than impossible, here at the ends of the earth when he had almost forgotten it himself, and it terrified him. "Tell me, curse you-how do you know my name!"
"He attacks us!" Hikat cried. "We must destroy him…!"
"Who is there?" quailed Hoorooen.
"Peace, brothers. He is only frightened. Sit, Barrick Eddon. Listen to all we have to say."
The thing that kept him from running now helped him to sit beside the fire. The rippling flames made the three figures seem to float before his eyes like something seen in the last moments of waking.
"All of us were born long ago in the city called Sleep," Hau began. "It is true that Hoorooen is the eldest, but that is all that can be said for certain. Even Hikat, the youngest, is so old now that we cannot remember when he came into the world."
"She," said Hikat, but for the first time some of the edge of anger was gone and the voice sounded almost wistful. "For some reason I feel I was a woman."
"It matters not," said Hau kindly. "We are old. We share blood. We were born to the people called the Dreamless, in the city called Sleep, but they cast us out…"
Barrick felt a stirring of fear again. "The Dreamless!"
"Hold until you hear all our story. Not all who walk beneath the darklights of Sleep are as cruel as the one you met, but we are different from all of them. We are the Sleepers."
"They sent us away," said Hoorooen. "I am the only one who remembers. We slept, and that frightened them. We dreamed…"
"Yes," said Hau. "Among the Dreamless, we alone dreamed, and our dreams were no mere fancies but the true flickering of the fire in the void. In our dreams we saw that the gods would fall, and saw that the Dreamless would turn against their masters in Qul-na-Qar. We saw the coming of the mortals into the land. All this we saw and foretold, but our own people did not heed us. They feared us. They drove us out."
"I have never seen the darklights," said Hikat angrily. "My rightful home was stolen from me."
"You saw them," Hau declared. "You just do not remember. We have all lost so much, waited so long…"
"I… I don't understand," said Barrick. "You… you are Dreamless? But I thought the Dreamless never slept…"
"Let me show you." The middle figure threw back its hood. As with the gray man in Greatdeeps, skin as fine and thin as silk clung to his gaunt features, but Hau's skin was also scored with a stitchery of innumerable fine wrinkles, so that he looked as though he were made of cobwebs. The biggest difference, though, was that where Ueni'ssoh's eyes had been unblinking, silvery-blue orbs, the creature who stood before Barrick had only more wrinkles of flesh beneath his brows, his sockets as empty as desert sands.
"You're blind!"
"We do not see as others do," Hau corrected him. "Had we been like our unsleeping brethren we would have been blind indeed. But in our dreams we see more than anyone."
"I am tired of seeing so much," said Hoorooen sadly. "It never makes anyone happy."
"The truth makes no one happy," snapped Hikat. "Because all truth ends in death and darkness."
"Quiet, my loves." Hau lowered himself back to the ground, then reached out to his comrades. After hesitating a moment, they both took the offered hand, so that the Sleepers were joined. Hikat and Hoorooen then extended their own hands on either side of the small fire. Barrick stared at the trio across the flames, not understanding, or not wanting to understand.
"Take our hands," Hau said. "You have come here for a reason."
"I came here because I was lost-because those silkin things were trying to kill me…"
"You came here because you were born," said Hikat, impatient again. The extended hands still waited on either side for Barrick to take them. "Perhaps it began even before that. But you are here and that proves you belong. Nobody comes to the Hill of Two Gods without a reason."
"There is a page for you in the Book of the Fire in the Void, said Hau. Let us read from it."
"Wait! There is another soul reaching out for you," said Hoorooen. "A twinned soul that seeks you."
Briony. That finally decided Barrick-by the gods, how he had missed her! He moved a little closer to the fire so he could reach the two proffered gray hands. The room was not cold but the fire didn't seem to give off any heat, even when he leaned so close, and its flickering light revealed little more than where the deepest shadows lay. Despite a sudden terror far beyond what the situation seemed to offer, he let his hands close on the dry, slippery fingers of Hikat and Hoorooen. A moment later his eyes slid shut without his willing it, and suddenly he was falling-falling! Plunging downward helplessly into darkness, limbs f lailing…
But where were his limbs? Why did he seem to be only a single heavy thought, falling into the void?
He fell. At last, something other than darkness glimmered in the depths below him. For a moment he thought it was some vast, circular sea; a moment later it seemed an ornamental pond of silvery water, with sides of pale stone. Then he saw it for what it was-the mirror he carried for Gyir, but grown to great size. He had only a moment to marvel at this inversion, at the idea that he could fall into something that was even now in his own pocket, and then he plunged through its cold surface and out the other side.
He stopped moving. The mirror, though, still remained, but now it hung before him against a field of utter black, like a picture in the Portrait Hall back in Southmarch, and he could see his own face in it.
No, not his face: the features of the person there had changed somehow without him noticing, sliding like quicksilver into new positions, shifting color like the towers of Southmarch as the morning sun appeared and climbed into the sky. The face that looked back at him was black-haired and dark-skinned, very young but also very worried and pinched with weariness. Despite it all he thought her beautiful. It was her, truly her-he had never seen her so clearly! The face in the mirror was that of the dark-haired girl who had long haunted his dreams.
"You," she said wonderingly-so she could see him, too. "I feared you were gone forever."
"Truly, I nearly was." He could see and understand her better than ever before but their conversation was still much like a dream, with some things not even spoken but still understood and some things incomprehensible even after they had been said. "Who are you? And why… why can I see you now?"
"Does it make you unhappy?" she asked with a touch of amusement. She was younger than he'd thought she would be, still with a hint of childhood in her face, but although her gaze was clever and kind, something in her eyes seemed veiled, the effect of wounds survived but not forgotten. She seemed to be standing only inches away, but at the same time she shimmered and almost vanished as his eye moved, like something seen through thick mist, like something seen in a dream.
It's all a dream. He was suddenly terrified he wouldn't remember this dear, now-familiar face when he was awake again.
Awake? But he could not even remember where he was, let alone whether he could be dreaming. If he was asleep, where did his body lie? How had he come here?
"Tell me your name, spirit-friend?" she asked him. "I should know it, but I don't! Are you nafaz-a ghost? You are so pale. Oh, I hope if you are a ghost, you died happily."
"I'm not dead. I'm… I'm certain I'm not!"
"Then that is even better." She smiled; her teeth gleamed against the darkness of her skin. "And look-all your hair is fiery like my witch streak! How odd dreams are!"
She was right-the streak in her hair was as red as his. It felt like something more than mere kinship. "I don't think I'm a dream, either. Are you asleep?"
She thought about it. "I don't know. I think so. And you?"
"I'm not sure." But as soon as his thoughts began to slide away from the mirror hanging in blackness he began to fear he would never be able to find it again. "Why can we see each other? Why should we?"
"I don't know." Her look turned serious. "But it must mean something. The gods do not give out such gifts for no reason."
That seemed like something he had just heard or thought himself. "What's your name?" But he knew it, didn't he? How could she feel so close, so real, so… important, but still be nameless?
She laughed and he could feel it like a cool breeze across overheated skin. "What's yours?"
"I can't remember."
"Nor can I. It's hard to remember names in dreams. You're… you're just him to me. That pale-skinned boy with red hair. And I'm… well, I'm me."
"The black-haired girl." But it made him sad. "I want to know your name. I need to know it. I need to know that you're real, that you live. I lost the only other person I care about…"
"Your sister," she said, her face suddenly sad; then: "How did I know that?"
"Perhaps I told you. But I don't want to lose you, too. What's your name?"
She stared at him, her lips parted, about to say something, but instead she remained silent for a long moment. The mirror seemed to shrink against the darkness, although he could still see her soft thick eyelashes, her long, narrow nose, even the tiny mole on her upper lip. He was afraid that if he waited in silence too long the mirror would shrink and fall away from him. He almost spoke, but understood suddenly that if she did not think of her name now, if she did not tell him, she never would. He had to trust her.
"I used to be a Hive Priestess," she said at last-slowly, like someone reading from an old, damaged book. "Then I went to live with the other grown women. There were so many women! All together, all scheming and plotting. But worst of all was that we all belonged to… to him. The terrible one. Then I ran away. Oh, gods save me, I do not want to go back to him!"
Again he ached to speak but he knew somehow he should not. She had to find it herself.
"And I will not go back. I will stay free. I will do what I want. I'll die before I let him use me, either as a toy or as a weapon." She paused. "Qinnitan. My name is Qinnitan."
And in that moment he found a sudden strength, something that rooted him despite all the darkness through which he had come, rooted him in his own blood and history and name. "And I am Barrick. Barrick Eddon."
"Then come to me, Barrick Eddon, or I will come to you," Qinnitan said. "Because I am so afraid to be alone…!"
And then the mirror did fall away, spinning into darkness like a silver coin dropped down a well, like a bright shell tumbled back into the ocean, a shooting star vanishing into the endless field of night…
"Qinnitan!" But he was alone now in emptiness. He tried to feel again the strength and certainty that had given him his name, the knowledge of his own living blood, rushing through his veins hot as molten metal…
My blood…
Then he could see it like a river, a red river, stretching away in two directions. One way vanished into an impenetrable, silvery mist. The other way snaked a course back into darkness, but a living darkness full of movement and suggestion. It almost felt as though he could reach out and trace it with a finger, like a line of paint on a map, a line that meant movement, a road, a track, something that would lead him to… to…
Silver flashed, then flashed again, dazzling him. He fell into the hot red river and for a moment was certain it would destroy him, that it would boil away all that he was, even the name he had just recovered.
Barrick, he told himself, and it was as though he stood on the bank and called it out to another part of himself that was drowning in the crimson current. Barrick Eddon. I am Barrick Eddon. Barrick of the River of Blood…
And suddenly another face was there, congealing out of the redness just as the face of the girl had come to him out of blackness. It was a man, half-ancient, half-young, with white streaming hair and a bandage wrapped around his eyes, a face dimly familiar, as if seen once on an old coin.
Come quickly, manchild, the blind man said. Soon it will all be moving too fast to change the course. We are rushing toward darkness. We are hurrying toward the end of all things.
Come soon or you must learn to love nothingness.
And then everything around Barrick fell away into a greater darkness and he was falling too, tumbling once more through the unending black void, empty of all feeling and thoughts, touched only by a harsh, moaning wind and the dying whisper of the blinded man:
… You must learn to love nothingness…

11

Cut and Thrust "In ancient days Zmeos and his brother Khors stole Perin's daughter, Zoria.The war that followed changed the shape of the earth and even the length of days and nights. Almost all scholars agree that the fairies took the side of Zmeos, the Old Serpent. Because of this, the Trigonate Church still holds the Qar people 'cursed and excommunicate'." -from "A Treatise on the Fairy Peoples of Eion and Xand" "PRINCESS BRIONY," said Lady Ananka as the servitors cleared away the most recent course, "can you tell me how children are raised in the north?"
A few whispers and quiet anticipatory laughter ran the length of the royal table. Briony wished her friend was beside her, but Ivgenia had been assigned to one of the lesser tables at the other end of the hall and she might as well have been in another country.
"I'm sorry, Baroness, but I did not hear your question."
"How are children raised in the north?" the king's mistress asked. "Are they allowed to run wild there, as the Marchfolk allow their sheep and other animals to do?"
Briony smiled carefully. "Not all our animals run wild, Lady, but for those who live in areas where grass grows freely it only makes sense to take advantage of the bounty the gods provide."
"But it is the children I am interested in, dear," said Ananka with acid sweetness. "For instance, I was told that you were taught to fight with a sword and shield. Most exciting, I am sure, but to us it seems a little… uncivilized. I hope I do not offend."
Briony did her best to keep smiling, but it was growing harder. She had not expected the assault to begin quite so early in the evening-they had only finished the soup-but no one could stop this except the king, and Enander seemed much more interested in his wine and the conversation of an attractive woman on his other side.
It is like one of Shaso's knife exercises, Briony told herself. Combined with playing one of Finn's invented parts. If I could do both of those, I can achieve this, too. "How could you possibly offend, Lady?" Briony asked the king's mistress, letting no hint of irony into her words. "When you and His Majesty have so kindly given me a place here, as well as the priceless gift of your friendship?"
"Of course," said Ananka slowly, as if reassessing her strategy. Another flurry of whispers ran around the table. Those who had been deliberately ignoring Briony for social reasons were now regarding her openly, able at last to indulge their curiosity. "But I inquire because there is something else I wanted to ask. Something that I hoped you could… help me understand."
Whatever happens, do not be drawn into a battle, Briony told herself. She has the high ground here and all the other advantages. "Of course, Lady Ananka."
Ananka put a grave expression on her handsome, long-boned face. "Is it true that you challenged Hendon Tolly to a fight? A… swordfight?"
The whispers became something louder and more violent-laughs, gasps, expressions of disbelief and disgust. Women who had never done anything in their lives more strenuous than sewing stared at Briony as though she were some freakish example of the gods' displeasure-a two-headed ram or a legless cat. The looks on their faces ignited a flame of anger in Briony's gut, and for a moment it was all she could do not to stand up and sweep her crockery onto the floor.
Every night this woman tormented her. Gods, I wish I had my sword now!
"If you lose your temper, you will likely lose the fight." She heard Shaso's gruff voice as if he stood at her shoulder. "The warrior who can keep his thoughts clear is always armed." Briony took a breath. "To play calm, you must remember calm." That had been Nevin Hewney in one of his sober moments. "Bring that feeling to your thoughts. Taste it like a piece of fruit." She thought of riding the wagon when they had first crossed into Syan, how the great expanse of the Esterian river valley had opened before her like the arms of a welcoming friend.
"I did challenge him, Lady," she said, her voice light. "I regret it now, of course. It was not seemly and it put a burden on my other guests." Nothing wrong with a small feint in return, though, was there? "No hostess should ever force her guests to participate in her own bad manners."
Another quiet chuckle ran around the table, but Briony fancied the laughter might have become a tiny bit more sympathetic.
"You put a sword to his throat, did you not?" asked Ananka sweetly, as though she too sought only to minimize an unfortunate moment.
"I did, my lady," she said. She was pleased to realize that much of her anger had passed through her like a storm. "I certainly did, and as I said, I am ashamed. But let us not forget, he is the man who usurped my family's throne. Imagine how you would feel if one of your loyal nobles," Briony turned with a smile, looking up and down the table, "turned out to be a traitor? Unbelievable, I know, but we trusted the Tollys, too."
For the first time she seemed to have Enander's attention. "Did you have no idea, then?" the king asked. "Did this Duke Hendon not live at your court?"
"The duke was his brother Gailon, Majesty," Briony gently corrected him. "And Gailon was, I must admit, a better man than I gave him credit for. Hendon killed him, too, as it turns out."
Now the whispers were unleavened by laughter. "Terrible," said one of the women, an old duchess with a wig like a bird's nest. "You poor thing. How frightened you must have been."
Briony smiled again, as shyly and humbly as she could. At the end of the table Ananka's face was set in a mask of polite sympathy, but Briony had no doubt that the baroness was none too happy with the way the conversation had slipped her reins. "Frightened-yes, of course. Terrified. But I did only what any young noblewoman would do when her father's throne was in jeopardy. I ran away in search of friends. Trustworthy friends, like King Enander. And again I thank him… and the Lady Ananka… for all they have done for me." She lifted her cup and bowed her head in the direction of Enander. "May the Three Brothers give you long lives and good health to equal your great kindness, your Majesty."
"His Majesty," echoed the others, and drank up. Enander looked surprised but not unhappy. Ananka was hiding her irritation well.
Briony considered it a victory on both counts.
After Briony had sent her maids away, she took out the note and studied it for the fifth or sixth time since she had received it the night before.
Come to the garden in the Vane Courtyard an hour after sunset on Stonesday.
It had been sitting on her writing desk when she returned, a homely piece of twine around it instead of a wax seal. She did not recognize the handwriting but she had a good idea who had left it for her. Just to be on the safe side, though, she went to her chest and lifted out the boy's clothes she had worn while traveling with Makewell's Men. She had sent them to be cleaned, then packed them away-there was no telling when she might need them again. Even this, perhaps the greatest palace in Eion, felt like poor and unsafe shelter after the events of the last year.
Underneath the homespun garments was the sack with her Yisti knives. She rucked up her long skirts, not without a great deal of puffing and gasping as she bent across the whalebone stomacher, and was about to strap the smaller knife to her leg when she realized the foolishness of what she was doing.
What, shall I ask an enemy to wait while I roll around on the ground trying to reach past my petticoats for my dagger? What had Shaso said? "Examine your clothes… find places you can keep them and draw them without snagging." What would he have thought of her struggling red-faced to reach her leg?
She gave up and stood. She pulled on her mantle, then slipped the smaller of the two blades into her sleeve just as somebody knocked on her chamber door. Briony waited for a moment before remembering the maids were gone, Feival was out collecting gossip in the servants' hall, and she was alone. "Who's there?" she called.
"Just me, Princess."
She opened it but did not step aside to let her friend in. "Gods keep you, Ivvie. I don't think I'm going down to dinner."
Ivgenia looked at her clothes. "Are you going out, Snowbear?" The name was a little joke-her friend liked to pretend Briony came from the far, frozen north.
"No, no, I'm just cold." It was hard to lie to someone she thought of as a friend, but she could not bring herself to trust anyone in the court, even sweet, kindly Ivgenia e'Doursos. "I'm not feeling well, dear-just a little chill on my heart tonight. Please give the king and Lady Ananka my best wishes."
When Ivgenia was gone Briony found her shoes and slipped into them. It had been a dry week, which was good-it made the prospect of waiting out of doors more appealing. Still, as she walked quietly down the corridor she was already netted with gooseflesh.
The Vane Courtyard was named for an immense weathervane in the shape of Perin's flying horse. It stood atop a tall tower at one end of the courtyard, a monument that could be seen halfway across Tessis and was often used as the reference point in local directions. On the far side of the highest courtyard wall ran the Lantern Broad itself, the massive, ancient street that gave Broadhall Palace its name: Briony could hear the lowing of oxen, the scrape and thunk of cartwheels, and the shouts of peddlers. For a moment she wondered what it would be like to walk out of the palace and into that great street and simply follow where it led her-find a life that had nothing to do with courtly connivance or family responsibility, a life without monsters, fairies, traitors, or poisoners. If only she could…
"Hello, Lady," said a deep voice beside her ear.
Before the second syllable was finished she had whirled and snugged her knife against his throat.
"I gather you are not pleased to see me," said Dawet dan-Faar, his voice only a little thickened by the blade pushing against his gorge. "I am not certain why, Princess Briony, but I will be happy to apologize directly you remove your pretty blade from my windpipe."
"Did you enjoy yourself?" She lowered the knife and backed a step away. She had forgotten the smell of his skin and the quiet rumble of his voice and she did not like the way those things made her feel. "Sneaking into my rooms to leave a note? You men, you are all boys when it comes to it, playing at games of war and spycraft even when you do not need to."
"Games?" He raised an eyebrow. "I think what happened to you and your family shows that these are not merely games. Lives are at stake."
"Why? Because of other men." She slipped the knife back into her sleeve. "What will happen to you if you are caught here, Master dan-Faar?"
"In truth? Nothing that cannot be fixed, but I would prefer not to have to set my energies to such repairs if I can avoid it."
"Then let's go sit on the bench beneath that apple tree. It is mostly out of sight from the colonnades." She led him toward the bench and swept her skirts carefully to the side so she could sit down. She patted the wood a decorous distance away. "Here, sit. Tell me what has happened to you since I've seen you last. We had no time to talk at the inn."
"Ah, yes," he said. "The False Woman, with its grubby little proprietor. That was an unpleasant afternoon-they almost had me."
"Oh, stop." Briony shook her head. "I told you, these games bore me. Do you truly expect me to believe you escaped all on your own?"
He looked more than a little startled. "What do you mean, Princess?"
"Really, Master dan-Faar. What was it you said to the guard captain? 'I swear by Zosim Salamandros, you have the wrong man!' What, swearing by the Trickster god himself as a pass code and you think I could not guess? And then that… charade of an escape, conveniently out of everyone's sight? After spending months with a troupe of players, did you think I would not recognize sham and playacting? The guard captain let you go."
A smile tugged at the edge of Dawet's mouth, just visible in the torchlight. "I am… speechless," he said at last.
"I can even guess with whom you made that arrangement," she said. "Lord Jino, the king's spymaster-would it by any chance be him? No, you need not answer. The only real questions, Master dan-Faar, would be about your true relationship with the Syannese court. Secret envoy from Ludis Drakava in Hierosol? Or a double agent working originally for King Enander, but pretending to serve Drakava?"
"I am impressed, my lady," said Dawet. "You have been thinking, I see, and thinking carefully and well… but I am afraid you are not yet the mistress of intrigue you think yourself to be."
"Oh?" The air was growing cold now that the night had come on. She tucked her hands inside her sleeves. "And what have I missed?"
"You are assuming that I am your friend and not your enemy."
A moment later Dawet had clutched her two wrists through the sleeve and prisoned them together in the firm grip of a single hand. In the other hand he held a knife, longer and more slender than Briony's as he laid the blade gently against her cheek.
"You dastard! You… you traitor! I trusted you!"
"Exactly, my lady. You trusted me… but why? Because I admired you? Because my leg looks shapely in woolen hose? Yet I was your father's captor's man when you met me-poor grounds for friendship."
"And I treated you well when no one else would." Briony was trying slowly to tilt her balance so that she could kick Dawet hard in the leg, hoping it would hurt him enough that she could jerk free from his grasp and draw her own blade. She would rather have kicked him higher-Shaso had been most thorough in teaching her the best places to strike in close combat-but neither her angle nor her petticoats would permit it.
"Which matters not, my lady. I am trying to make a point, here." He leaned close, so that the thin blade of his knife was as near his face as hers. "You mistake men for moral creatures, as if each must measure up the good and bad done to him and then act accordingly, as though they were incorruptible judges weighing out a sentence."
Briony did her best not to tense. "Oh, I know men are corruptible… and corrupted… never fear."
She lashed out with her foot, hoping to surprise him. Instead, Dawet kept his hold on her wrists and hooked her leg with his, knocking her remaining foot from beneath her. Briony slid off the bench and would have fallen but Dawet held her up, so that she dangled between his hand and the bench like a deer carcass hung in front of a hunter's lodge. Her shame and fury almost exceeded her fear. "Let me go!"
"As you wish, Lady." He let go and she dropped the short distance to the ground.
Briony was up an instant later with her knife in her hand. "You! How dare you? How…"
"How dare I what?" His expression was flat, almost cruel, which was just as well. If he had smiled at her she might have tried to kill him. "Show you what a fool you are being? You are a very clever girl, Briony Eddon, but you are still only that-a girl. A maiden, even, I do not doubt. Do you understand what you have risked of your own safety and your family's fortunes coming here like this?"
The Yisti dagger wavered in her hand. "You… you do not mean to harm me?"
"By the Great Mother, Princess, do you think I am such a fool as to try to do injury to a white-skinned northern girl in a northern castle, within the hearing of a hundred armed guards or more, and not even put a hand over her mouth?" He shook his head. "Tell me I have not so far misestimated your intelligence, or you mine."
"You had a knife to my throat!"
"If I truly meant you harm, I would have disarmed you." He reached out, fast as Shaso himself had been, faster perhaps, and used his own blade to flip her dagger out of her hand. It spun into the darkness, disappearing into the shadowy garden border without a sound. "Now go find it. I will wait. That did not look the sort of knife anyone would like to lose."
When she came back, she had hidden the Yisti dagger in her sleeve again. "If it weren't for this wretched dress I would have had both knives out, and you would have had one of them in your shin, at the very least."
He grinned, but there was no mirth in it. "Then let us both be glad you didn't, for I feel pretty certain that things would not have gone so easily or happily as you suppose."
"But why did you do that?" She sat down again, much more warily this time, but Dawet did not make any movement toward her. "You frightened me."
"Good, my lady. That is the first thing I have heard since I met you here that makes me happy. I want you frightened. You are in terrible danger. Have you not realized that?"
She stared at him, doing her best to remember the lessons again, not of warcraft but of mummery. It would not do to let the tears well up. It would be altogether too… girlish. "Yes, Master dan-Faar, I have certainly realized that, most notably when someone tried to poison me three days gone, but I thank you for the reminder."
"Your sarcasm serves you poorly, Princess. You should thank me in truth for being honest with you when others would not or cannot." He reached out his hand and gently placed it on her arm. "In truth, I wish that were not my role. I would someone had given me a fairer, kinder part to play…"
This time he did not anticipate her strike. She moved so quickly that the point of her blade pinked the fat of his hand before he could pull back. He stood up, anger clouding his face, and yanked off his glove to examine the wound. It was not, Briony thought, a very serious spite. "You little…! Why did you do that?"
"You are the one who counseled mistrust, Master dan-Faar." She was breathing hard and her heart was drumming. "You speak to me of how kind you are, how thoughtful, how you have my best interests in mind where no one else does. Very well. Start by answering this question, please-what are you? Are you an enemy with a soft spot toward me? Or a friend? Would you be my brother, or would you be a lover? I have spent my life at the center of public doings. I am not so flattered by your attention as to lose all sense of who I am and what I'm after, nor to forget that you seem to want to have things all ways at once." She stared at him. "Well, sir, what would you be to me?"
For a moment Dawet simply stared at her over his hand as he sucked on the place where she had pinked him. "Princess, I do not know. In truth, I am not certain I know who you are anymore. Your time in exile has changed you."
"Well, that should be no surprise, should it?" She once more tucked away her dagger. "If you decide you want to speak to me again-perhaps to give me some information I could truly use, like what you know of my father-you will know where to find me."
"Wait." Dawet lifted his hand to her as though conceding a wager. "Enough, Briony."
"Princess Briony, Master dan-Faar. We do not know each other so well, nor have you proved your friendship yet."
He drew back. "You are hard, Lady. Did I not warn you back in Southmarch that someone in your court meant you harm?"
"Come now. Without naming any names to me, what use was that? Of what ruler in all the world is that not true? You have not done me any unkindnesses, Envoy, but as far as I can see you have done me no services either, except to share the gift of your company." She unbent enough to give him a half-smile. "A gift not without merit, but hardly the stuff of undying loyalty."
He shook his head. "You have become a hard-shelled girl, Princess."
"I have stayed a living woman when many wished it were otherwise. Now tell me of my father or let us say farewell and get out of this cold night."
"There is nothing much to say. When I left Hierosol to come here he was still Ludis Drakava's prisoner. Since then I have heard the same rumors as you-that Ludis has fled, that your father has been given to the autarch, that Hierosol will fall at any moment…"
"What? Given to… to the autarch? I have never heard… oh, Merciful Zoria, say it is not true! What madness is this?"
"But… surely you have heard the tale. Many people here in Tessis are repeating it-Ludis traded him for his own escape, it's said. But do not fear too much, lady, it is only rumor so far. Nothing is known for certain…"
She hissed her anger. "Blood of the Brothers! Not one of these cursed Syannese has spoken a word of it to me!" She reached out and plucked a blossom from the branch near her head and held it for a moment. No tears, she reminded herself. She crushed it in her fingers and let the petals fall. "Tell me everything you have heard." The tears had ebbed without ever reaching her eyes. She felt a cold hardness in her breast, as though ice grew on her heart.
"As I said, Lady, these are only tales, much confused and…"
"Do not soothe me, dan-Faar. I am no longer a child. Just… inform me." She took a breath. The night seemed to bend close; the chilly darkness inside her rose to greet it. "I may have lost my family's throne but I will take it back, that I swear, and our enemies will suffer for what they've done. Yes, I promise that on the heads of the gods themselves." She looked up at Dawet's surprised face, just visible in the light from an open window above. "You are staring, man. Put the time to better use. Tell me what I wish to know."
